# Macros

This guide details which macro systems are supported in Scheme, and
when and how to use each of them.

## Introduction to Scheme macros

Other Lisp dialects such as Common Lisp generally specify a simple
macro system in which all macros in that language are written. These
macro systems are _non-hygienic_, which means that macro definitions
must be careful not to _capture_ identifiers (symbols) at the macro
call site that happen to have the same name.

To combat the problem of variable capture, Scheme implementations have
a long tradition of _hygienic macros_ which make sure the identifiers
used in macro definitions are automatically distinct from any
like-named identifiers at the call site.

Unfortunately hygienic macros are a complex topic and no particular
macro system has been agreed upon as the best. Hence one Scheme
implementation can support more than one macro system, and in fact the
bigger ones generally do. This fact can be quite confusing to people
coming from other Lisps, and is worth emphasizing.

## Attitudes toward hygienic macros

Some Scheme programmers are especially passionate about hygienic
macros and feel that hygiene is one of the essential features that
make Scheme a good language.

However, such praise is not universal. In the opposite camp, a handful
of Schemers believe the problems avoided by hygienic macros are not
serious enough to justify the complexity of hygienic macro systems.
(Even fans of hygienic macros generally concede that they add
significant complexity.) Hence a handful of Scheme implementations do
not have a hygienic macro system at all. These are generally small
implementations: large implementations tend to favor giving
programmers more alternatives of all kinds.

Perhaps the majority of Schemers do not feel particularly strongly
about the topic. Most prefer hygienic macros where available but are
not picky about it. They think hygienic macros are just one of
Scheme's many useful features, and the language has plenty to offer
even without them.

## Non-standard, non-hygienic macros (define-macro)

Some Scheme implementations have a *define-macro* which is almost
identical to the *defmacro* in Common Lisp, Emacs Lisp, and Clojure.
It is a simple, non-hygienic macro system true to the wider Lisp
tradition.

## Standard, hygienic macros (syntax-rules, syntax-case)

The first Scheme standard to tackle macros was R4RS (1991). It said
that macros may be defined using *define-syntax* (note:
*define-syntax* is different from *define-macro*). It also said the
*syntax-rules* macro system must be supported by all implementations
of the standard. *syntax-rules* is a simple yet surprisingly effective
hygienic macro system based on pattern-matching and rewriting. Both
*define-syntax* and *syntax-rules* have been a part of standard Scheme
ever since.

R6RS (2007) added a more complex macro system called *syntax-case* in
addition to the old *syntax-rules*. *syntax-case* can run arbitrary
Scheme code to build the macro expansion while maintaining hygiene by
default.

The small edition of the R7RS language provides only *define-syntax*
and *syntax-rules*. The R7RS large language (work in progress) may
also provide either *syntax-case* or another powerful hygienic macro
system.

## Non-standard, hygienic macros (implicit/explicit renaming)

Some Scheme implementations have *ir-macro-transformer* and/or
*er-macro-transformer* as an alternative to *syntax-case*.

## A practical approach

Generally the best approach is to try writing a macro using
*syntax-rules* first. It's simple to use and works well for most
common tasks.

If you run into its limitations, try *syntax-case* which is hygienic
and a standard part of R6RS.

If *syntax-case* is not available in the Scheme implementation you
need, find out if it has *er-macro-transformer*.

Finally, *define-macro* should get any job done in a pinch. People who
are Lisp programmers but not Scheme aficionados should also be able to
help you with *define-macro*, whereas the hygienic macro systems are
not instantly recognizable to other Lispers. If you are coming to
Scheme from another Lisp, it may be best to start with *define-macro*
and work your way up to *syntax-rules* and then *syntax-case*.

## Macro systems in Scheme implementations

[options=header]
|=====
|Implementation|define-macro|syntax-rules|syntax-case|er-macro-
|Bigloo|x|||
|Chicken|x|x||x
|Chez Scheme||x|x|
|Chibi-Scheme||x||x
|Gambit|x|x||
|Gauche|x|x||x
|Ikarus||x|x|
|Loko Scheme||x|x|
|MIT Scheme||x||x
|Sagittarius||x|x|x
|=====
